# Analysis of Three Minute Thesis Presentation

[Watch Emily Johnston's Three Minute Thesis University of South Australia Grand Final winning
presentation][link_1], '*Mosquito research: saving lives with pantyhose and paperclips*'. Emily
also won the People's Choice award. 

[link_1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dh0pJdgY6Lc

## Transcript

I came to Australia to study the deadliest animal in the world. Now, there may be some Australian
audience members thinking "Struth! Science has finally recognized the importance of the drop
bears!". But I'm not studying drop bears, because around the world, by transmitting diseases like
malaria and dengue fever, mosquitoes kill more than a million people every year—making them the
deadliest animal on the planet.

Now, in Australia the most common mosquito borne disease is Ross River virus and it occurs at high
rates in some areas but not others. My question is "Why"? **What is it about certain areas that
makes them breed disease?** If we can understand the environmental factors that contribute to
disease transmission, then we can alter the environment or target our control efforts to prevent
human infections. 

But to answer that question, I had to find out where the infected mosquitoes were in South
Australia, and traditionally testing mosquitoes for virus has always been difficult; so I used a
new technique. It takes these cards, which are embedded with virus preserving chemicals and coats
them in honey. Mosquitoes will come to feed on the honey and, in the process, spit virus onto the
card where it can later be detected. 

Now, no one had ever used this technique in a broad-scale virus survey before, so I had to adapt it.
I developed new traps and set them at over 100 field sites across South Australia. And I captured
over 20,000 hungry mosquitoes and let them feed on the card for a week before testing the cards for
virus. 

Now, you may not think that these traps look very impressive, but science doesn't have to be
beautiful, it has to be effective; and these traps are proving to be our most sensitive method of
detecting infected mosquitoes. I found three types of infections: Ross River virus, Barmah Forest
virus, and Stratford virus—which has never before been found in South Australia. 

I now have the virus data I need to conduct my analysis; and I'm collecting publicly available data
about the environment surrounding my traps—like the density of human housing, the biodiversity of
mammals, and the ratio of green space to buildings—to see if any of those environmental factors can
link these virus hotspots that I've shown here. 

But the most exciting part of my research so far has been the success of this method. Public health
officials in Victoria, Queensland, and Western Australia have been in contact with us about
implementing this technique for their surveillance next year.

And I've developed these traps in a tight budget. I used recycled milk cartons, pantyhose, and
paperclips to make the traps. Each trap costs less than a dollar and can be reused for the whole
season; that was important to me because the majority of mosquito-borne disease risk happens in
economically impoverished countries. In India for example, where about 1/4 of the population lives
on a dollar a day, there are 33 million cases of dengue infection every year. With my low budget
virus surveillance and spatial analysis method, I can help any country—regardless of resources—find
out where their deadliest animals occur, why they're there, and how we can stop them from infecting
humans. 

Thanks.


## Analysis

Notice that the speaker:

1. speaks in well-structured sentences with clear subjects, verbs, and punctuation; and the
punctuation of her sentences comes across in spoken words

2. speaks in well-structured paragraphs

      For example, the first sentence of her first paragraph states clearly what she did:  
      "*I came to Australia to study the deadliest animal in the world.* \"
      The final sentence of her paragraph explains the importance of her studies and explains why
      she would have an interest in the topic: "*Around the world, by transmitting diseases like
      Malaria and Dengue fever, mosquitoes kill ...* \"

3. does not overuse jargon or uncommon English words

      Except for the joke she made in an Australian accent ("*Struth!...* \"), all the words she spoke
      can be understood by someone with a regular English vocabulary. 
      
      Example 1: in the video around time 1:46 she shows a map pointing to different locations, but
      she just referred to the general location as South Australia. (She could have named 
      "Mypolonga", "Goolwa", or "Globe Derby" and left the non-local listener to wonder what
      she said.)
      
      Example 2: when she had to use specific terms, her sentence still had a structure:  
      "*I found three types of infections: Ross River virus, Barmah Forest virus, and Stratford 
      virus.* \"  
      A listener that may not be familiar with "Ross River", "Barmah Forest", or "Stratford" can
      still understand that she found X virus, Y virus, and Z virus.

4. concludes with a short summary of why her research is relevant, and leaves a point to remember

      "*With my low budget virus surveillance and spatial analysis method, I can help any
        country—regardless of resources—find out where their deadliest animals occur, why they're
        there, and how we can stop them from infecting humans.* \"
